good afternoon and welcome to today's
Downing Street press conference I'm
joined by chief scientific advisor so
Patrick valance and chief medical
officer Professor Chris Witte before we
get onto the detail can I first give an
update on the condition of the prime
minister I know a lot of people be
concerned about that I can tell you he's
receiving the very best care from the
excellent medical team at some Thomas's
Hospital he remains stable overnight
he's receiving standard oxygen treatment
and breathing without any assistance
he's not required any mechanical
ventilation or non-invasive respiratory
support he arranged in good spirits and
in keeping with usual clinical practice
his progress continues to be monitored
closely in critical care and will give
further updates on the PM's condition
when there are any material developments
and I know that there's been groundswell
of messages of support from people here
at home from leaders across the world
and I know that everyone will want to
join with me in wishing the Prime
Minister a very swift recovery as you'll
know that Prime Minister asked me to
deputize for him whilst he recovers and
in line with the prime minister's
instructions this morning I chaired the
meeting of senior ministers tackling
coronavirus and this afternoon I chaired
an update for members of the cabinet I
think it's probably worth just
remembering that as will be the case for
many people up and down the country who
know someone at work who's fallen ill
with the coronavirus it comes as a shock
to all of us he's not just the Prime
Minister for all of us in cabinet he's
not just our boss he's also a colleague
and he's also our friend so all of our
thoughts and prayers are with the Prime
Minister at this time with Kerry and
with his whole family and I'm confident
he'll pull through because if there's
one thing I know about this prime
minister he's a fighter and he'll be
back at the helm leading us through this
crisis in short order now calls for us
in cabinet we know exactly what he wants
from us and what he
expects from us right now and following
the cabinet discussion today I can
reassure the Prime Minister and we can
reassure the public that his team will
not blink and we will not flinch from
the task at hand at this crucial moment
we will keep all of our focus and all of
our resolve with calm determination on
delivering the government's plan to
defeat the coronavirus and it's with
that objective and with that unity of
purpose that the cabinet turned to
business today we had reports from four
ministerial groups on the action we're
taking across all of the strategic
priority areas including NHS capacity
procurement of ventilators and personal
protective equipment the delivery of
public services including social care on
the economy and our support for both
businesses and workers and of course on
the international action we're taking to
reinforce our efforts on the home front
as we've explained before our action
plan aims to slow the spread of the
virus so fewer people need hospital
treatment at any one time and that will
help us protect the NHS his ability to
cope at every step we've been following
the scientific advice the medical advice
and we've been very deliberate in the
actions that we've taken so that we take
the right steps at the right moment in
time we're increasing our NHS capacity
by dramatically expanding the number of
beds key staff life-saving equipment on
the frontline so people have the care
they need when they need it most
as we've consistently said we're
instructing people to stay at home so we
can protect the NHS and so that we can
save lives so today I can report that
through the government's ongoing
monitoring and testing programme that
again as of today 213,000 181 people
have now been tested for the corona
virus
fifty-five thousand two hundred and
forty two people have tested positive
the number of people admitted to
hospital with corona virus symptoms now
stands at eighteen thousand five hundred
and eighty-nine and of those who have
contracted the virus six thousand one
hundred and fifty
I'm very sorry to say died every death
in this pandemic is a tragedy in our
thoughts and our prayers or with their
loved ones that what must be an
incredibly difficult time and I think
these figures reinforce that the single
most important thing that we can all of
us do right now in this national effort
to defeat the corona virus is keep on
following the government's advice which
is to stay home protect the NHS and save
light and I'll now turn to so Patrick
who I think will talk us through some of
the data thank you very much I have the
first slide please
it's worth remembering this is a brand
new illness it transmits relatively
easily and in some people of course it's
severe it's therefore important that we
break the transmission in society we do
not allow this virus to go from
household to household and that's what
the social distancing measures are about
trying to slow the rate of transmission
in order to know whether those measures
are working we track a number of things
and here you can see the transport use
change which we've shown before
indicating very substantial reductions
in the use of London Underground the bus
is national rail and indeed use of all
motor vehicles this and other measures
show that the contact between people has
reduced dramatically as a result of the
social distancing measures that have
been put in place that in turn should
lead to a substantial reduction in the
transmission of the virus in the
community this if I can have the next
slide please
moves then through into the fewer new
cases appearing is the aim to try and
reduce the number of new cases this
shows the number of cases since the 16th
of March through to the 7th of April and
what you can see is there is not that
big upswing of growth that we talked
about at the beginning there is a fairly
steady increase in numbers it's possible
that we're beginning to see the
beginning of change in terms of the
curve flattening a little bit we won't
know that for sure for a week or so
but what we're not seeing is an
acceleration it's important that we keep
these new cases down because of course
this in turn leads to the number of
people going into hospital and the aim
all along is to reduce the number of
cases below the capacity of the NHS and
to save lives can I have the next slide
please
this graph shows the number of hospital
admissions in London at the top and then
in other areas you can see again there's
been a steady increase since the 16th of
March up until the 7th of April but
there hasn't been the accelerated take
off and again it's possible that we're
beginning to see the start of a change
where we might see numbers flattening
off
we can't won't be sure about that for a
week or so and we need to keep looking
at it but it does begin to suggest that
things might be moving in the right
direction in terms of numbers and it's
important that we carry on with the
measures we've got in place in order to
make sure that this does go in the right
direction
the important thing beyond these numbers
is what happens in intensive care units
and that we keep the intensive care unit
number down as well
and that's another thing which may be
moving in the right direction but I do
want to here say a big thank you to
everybody in the NHS the frontline staff
we were working so hard to make this
work
one other point as well as looking at
numbers there are clinical trials
starting trying to look at treatments
that might make a difference and as of
this afternoon there are over 1,900
patients in clinical trials across a
hundred hospitals that's an important
part of how we're going to tackle this
the ICU beds are important and the next
slide please
shows that the number of ICU beds has
been increasing so this is a graph over
time from the 21st of March the 6th of
April showing an increase in the ICU
beds that's been most marked in London
which has had the biggest outbreak so
far but it'll increase in the rest of
the country and the new Nightingale
hospitals in London Birmingham
Manchester Bristol Harrogate and and
further increases in capacity or what
the NHS is planning for to cope with the
numbers that we're talking about and
finally I've talked about the beginning
talked about the fact that we need to
see that coming through into admissions
to hospitals and to ICU and then it
takes a few weeks for that to feed
through unfortunately for some people
into death and I'd like to just show the
death figures so these are the graphs
showing the numbers of deaths across
different countries and you can see that
despite a little uptick in the numbers
today and the numbers do bounce around
the UK's on track we're roughly a couple
of weeks behind France a few weeks
behind Italy in terms of the numbers but
you can see that broadly things across
Europe move in the same direction and we
would expect the numbers of deaths to
lag after the ICU cases by a couple of
weeks so we should expect these to start
coming down in two or three weeks time
thank you for insectary Thank You
Patrick now happy to take some questions
from the media
Laura Koons Berg from the BBC and thank
you very much foreign secretary and with
the prime minister absent at this vital
time if there is a genuine disagreement
in the cabinet who actually makes the
decision and if I can ask the chief
scientific adviser you've shown that
there has been an increase in the
capacity of the number of intensive care
beds available around the country but on
the current numbers will there be enough
beds as this grows well first of all
decision making by government is made by
collective cabinet responsibility so
that is the same as before but we've got
very clear directions very clear
instructions from the prime minister and
we're focused with total unity and total
resolve on implementing them so that
when he's back in I hope in very short
order we would have made the progress
that he would expect and that the
country would expect I see you beds and
and Chris witty has been clear about
this as well there are always times in
every winter when ICU beds top out in
individual hospitals and that may happen
and I can't guarantee it won't what we
can say though is that the numbers
as we look at them now look as though we
should come in about right there
shouldn't be an overall increase above
the number of beds available the NHS I
think has done an amazing job of
increasing the capacity of ICU and so
things seem to be tracking in the right
direction but I don't think I can say
more than that and any Cris whether you
want to add anything or is that okay or
did you want to come back on any of it
and yeah I've been in foreign secretary
cabinet always in theory runs on
collective responsibilities but there
are always times when in the end one
person has to make the decision in
normal circumstances the Prime Minister
is the ultimate decision-maker in these
circumstances are you that person or
what happens if there is no agreement
well were you as I said we've got
collective cabinet responsibility but
the arrangements are very clear the
Prime Minister has asked for me to
deputize for him and to start
discharging the responsibilities for as
long as he's unable to do that and we've
got in the discharge of those
responsibilities and frankly the
direction instructions is given very
clear plans so we're all focused with a
unity of purpose and a clear and calm
determination to get that done from the
procurement of PPE getting it to the
frontline to supporting businesses and
all of the work ended and the Foreign
Office that we're doing on the
international level to reinforce that
effort on the home front
Robert Peston ITV a good afternoon mr.
Rob you say that you have very clear
instructions from the Prime Minister
about what to do but if there needed to
be a significant change of direction do
you have the authority to make that
change of direction or would you wait
for the Prime Minister's return and if I
could ask Sir Patrick
mr. Witte your own chart today does show
that the rates of growth in the number
of deaths in Germany is much slower than
the other European countries including
the UK that you cite what is there that
we can learn from Germany will it grow
on your question to me I'm Ben
asked when I was appointed given very
clear steer from the Prime Minister and
obviously as we've been going through
this crisis very clear instructions in
terms of dealing with coronavirus and
he's asked me to deputize for him for as
long as is necessary but the normal
cabinet collective responsibilities and
principles that inform that will apply
Pantry we look at all of the countries
and try and understand what differences
there are in terms of responses we look
right the way across the world in
regular contact but with the chief
scientific advisors and chief medical
officers in other countries to try and
understand different approach is taken
and different effects you're right the
German curve looks as though it's lower
at the moment and that is important and
I don't have a clear answer for you to
exactly what it is the reason for that
and there are obviously two things that
one will look at in terms of any any
response to any outbreak one is the
virus itself and the other is the
society into which that virus comes and
there are things to do with demographics
there are things to do with the way
systems are organized and of course
there may be differences in the way
certain responses have been taken and we
don't know but we're in regular contact
with the other countries again see if
Chris wants to add anything to that well
I think that the one thing I'd add to
that is we all know that Germany got
ahead in terms of its ability to do
testing for the virus and there's a lot
to learn from that and we've been trying
to learn the lessons from that did you
want to follow up there Rob or we well
it was it was just didn't quite say that
you feel confident that if you had to
make a change of direction and you
weren't able to communicate with the
prime minister would you have the
confidence in doing that I've got total
confidence in the arrangements that the
Prime Minister has put in place so that
I can discharge the responsibility for
him deputizing for him while he's out of
action obviously we hope that will be
for a very limited period of time Marc
Austin from Sky thank you very much
indeed foreign secretary first and
foremost everyone in this program and
everybody at Sky News sent their very
best to the prime minister we wish him a
speedy recovery my question is this the
Prime Minister is in intensive care the
health secretary caught the virus the
chief medical officer
what the virus we're very pleased to see
him back that were but 3p people
responsible for telling in the country
how not to get it got it so with respect
and I mean it is myth respect how did it
come to this and how is that allowed to
happen because you have a virus which is
totally indiscriminate and we follow all
of us the guidance as carefully as
possible
and but it's a very dangerous virus it's
very contagious and it just goes to show
that no one is impervious to it and we
all need to follow the guidance both the
letter in the spirit did you want to
come back mark yeah and Chris does he
have a an answer well the office exactly
the same really we all know that this is
an extremely easy virus to pass on that
is exactly why the lockdown was
necessary that was why the very large
number of things that we've had to ask
people to do and not do are in place
because it is extremely easy to catch
this virus and it is extremely easy to
pass it on even if people take really
careful precautions in terms of things
like washing their hands which remains
critical so I mean I think is that it's
a very clear illustration of the fact
that this is why we're having to do this
to ensure that we protect the NHS and
save the lives of other people
Jason grows from the Daily Mail thanks
to Bob you mentioned that you've had
instructions from the p.m. I wonder have
you had instructions about what he wants
to do about the looming decision on
whether to extend the lockdown and can
you give to the country any idea of what
that might be we're seeing Germany in
Austria level with people about how long
things like taken how they might be
lifted and a question first at Patrick
last month in that room you told us we
were three or four weeks behind Italy we
seemed given the shocking death toll
today to still be getting a similar
outcome to Italy other things that we
couldn't should have done or was this
outcome always inevitable on other
things we can do now to make a
difference
well Jason just in terms of the review
we're not at that stage yet we will take
any decision when the time is right
based on the facts and the scientific
and medical advice and our number one
and our overriding focus right now as
has just been demonstrated by the
previous question is to remain
absolutely focused on conveying the key
message which is everyone needs to keep
adhering to this guidance we've got a
long bank holiday
Easter weekend coming up warm weather we
understand that people are making big
sacrifices to follow this guidance it is
helping it is contributing to our
ability to tackle the the coronavirus
the worst thing now will be to take our
foot off the the pedal to ease up on
that and risk losing the gains that have
been made so it's absolutely critical
that people keep up that discipline and
the vast majority will and we hope
everyone will follow that example
because it is the way to make sure we
consolidate the progress we've made and
don't lose the progress we've made
Kristen Petros Patrick so this is a
pandemic meaning it's everywhere and
that's why we're seeing it across many
different countries and across all
populations and we are probably three or
four weeks behind Italy in terms of the
outbreak it doesn't mean we end up with
the same numbers and of course it's
important that as the ICU capacity has
been built up this idea of keeping the
numbers below the ICU capacity that's
absolutely critical
it's also worth worth just reflecting on
the fact that the most important thing
we can do is to implement the measures
that are in place now to keep this
suppressed that's really really
important it's what we need to be
focused on now it's how we're going to
come out the other side to be able to
say that the numbers are under control
and we can then move on to the next
phase did you want to come back Jason on
any of that well just to clarify mr.
Bober it sounds like the instructions
you're getting from the PM is that this
this lockdown is gonna have to stay we
are gonna have to keep our foot on the
pedal for a few more weeks at least is
that is that a fair interpretation no I
think we've been clear all along we'll
be guided by the evidence
that are the measures that we've put in
place on social distancing on everything
else the impact that they've had and
once we've got reliable data on that
which will come up and then the days
ahead we can consider whether and when
and how we want to take any further
decisions but our number one focus right
now is to keep the discipline of
compliance with those measures because
it will help us make progress and that's
the way we'll get through this crisis
and get out the other side as quickly
and as effectively as possible Heather
Stewart from The Guardian Oh Jason's
question to some extent were you
suggesting there that we won't see a
three week review of the lockdown
measures as we were promised when they
were put in place that we won't see that
if the Prime Minister is still in
hospital when you wait to leave that
hospital and to do that and broadly that
the modeling that was published on
Friday for the London School of Hygiene
and Tropical Medicine suggested it that
measures might have to stay in place for
many months social distancing for many
months at least they said with periodic
lock downs in order to keep the outbreak
within the capacity of the NHS I wonder
it whether that seems plausible and
whether it's now time to level with
people with kids who are wondering
whether they're going to see their
friends before the end of the summer
term and so on that this is going to
have to go on for four months not weeks
whether I think we have leveled with
everyone from the outset we've been as
transparent as possible in relation to
all of the data and all the information
that's why we've got the chief
scientific adviser and the chief medical
officer here but the critical thing is
to take evidence-based decisions and so
we've said that we will take any review
once we've got the evidence that the
measures are working and having the kind
of impact taking us past the peak which
means that they can be responsibly done
we're not at that stage yet see imagine
eternity anything I'd add is really what
we said yesterday I think it's really
important that we get to the point that
we are we all are confident that we're
beyond the peak and then at that point
start making it clear what combination
of things and over what period of time
seems a sensible combination to take us
through because I says I says I said
yesterday there are a large number of
different things we need to take into
account
in terms of the impact on health the
direct effects of the the virus itself
and also the indirect effects on the
health service more widely hey do you
want to follow up or anything else in
terms of when we might see that review
it depends on when you feel you have
enough and it'll be evidence-based and
so we'll rely on the evidence we get
from the impact of the measures that
have already been taken and as Chris
said what we need to do is get beyond
the peak when we can responsibly take
any further decisions based as I said on
the evidence that we've got we've set
that position out all along and we want
to follow it because it's the right
thing to do and again it's the right
thing to do to get us effectively and as
quickly as possible through the
coronavirus challenge Joe Murphy from
the Evening Standard can join you in
wishing the best the Prime Minister and
his recovery can you say how the
government is doing on course to meet
the target of a hundred thousand deaths
per day and as the man who's now in
charge will you ensure personally
delivered by the end of the night of the
month and perfecter witty a lot of
people are worried that care homes for
the elderly are not getting the same
support as other branches of the health
and care survey can you address such
worries as whether doctors and nurses
will go into homes rather than patients
whether there will be medical medically
qualified professionals going in and
whether you can stop agency nurses from
or carers rather from looking after more
than one home and then with being
spreading and why are the death in care
home not included in the daily tally a
big THANK YOU Joe so just on the most
recent data that's been released on test
there were 14,000 in a single day and so
that shows progress we've had 7500 NHS
workers and their families tested and
we've got nine drive-thru sites
currently operational in Nottingham
chessington Greenwich Wembley Sandwell
Manchester Belfast Edgbaston and gas go
and
Cardiff will be the tenth which will be
open shortly so we are making progress
on that in terms of the data question on
their NS versus their HS I don't know
whether Sir Patrick you wanted to
address that happy to do that the the
international reporting standard for des
all the other countries are based on
hospitalized deaths confirmed and that's
the same as the data that you're seeing
at the ons data which are important look
at overall deaths on death certificates
where coronaviruses mentions so that
they are not confirmed death necessarily
it's important to have both of those but
that's what the difference between the
two numbers is so firstly just to add to
that the ons data does include care home
deaths the hospital data obviously does
not so that's a it's one of the key
differences in terms of the looking
after the residence of care homes and
indeed nursing homes we've said right
from beginning that this is one of the
most difficult things we have to do and
one of the most important things we have
to do and that needs to in a sense
balance the needs to have the right
nursing medical and other care support
for the care rooms last minimizing
people going into care homes
unnecessarily because almost by
definition most residents of care homes
are relatively vulnerable people and if
he's important we get that balance right
that we protect people for example when
they come back from hospital that they
do get the brought the right medical
care but as I said right at the
beginning of this epidemic care homes
and nursing homes have are going to
provide us with some of the biggest
challenges and it's you know we have
seen already that over 9% of care homes
have reported cases I regret to say I
think the number of the number will go
up over time despite excellent work by
the the care home staff by nurses who go
in and by doctors and I would encourage
people not to go into care homes unless
they need to Rob Marik from the indy
thank very much for a secretary a
question for professor Witte if I can
the independent has seen a letter to GPS
from Jenny Harris which appears to raise
concerns that some highly vulnerable
people who need
shielded are not being shielded we
spoken to the family of a 95 year old
deaf blind woman who's totally dependent
on her daughter for care she doesn't
meet the criteria she's been told are
you concerned that there are many many
people out there who are not being
shielded as they should and what would
you what are you going to do about that
and a question please for you mr. rabe
returning to Joe's question the
government made a promise to the British
people last week that the hundred
thousand daily tests will be carried out
by the end of the month we learned
yesterday that the antibody tests won't
be ready by that date so can I just be
clear are you now promising you will
carry out 100,000 daily antigen tests
the test for the virus itself by the end
of the month and if you can't meet that
commitment will somebody carry the cap
just on that I think the health sector
is very clear on the target and while I
try to set out is the progress that
we've made
Fillie more work to do but important
that we've made the progress we have so
far Chris so on shielding it's it's so
the situation with shielding is that
there are broadly three groups of people
who we've asked to do different things
there's everybody who we really want to
stay at home unless they're going out
for work for necessary food and
medicines for medical care or for
exercise and we've really been very
clear about that because that is the way
we protect everybody including them the
people who are shielded then there's a
higher risk group of people who are
people on the whole who are over 70 and
have pre-existing health conditions
which mate which makes up roughly 16,000
16 million people overall and the
recommendations are the same for those
but we really need them to do it for
their own protection it's not just to
protect the NHS and protect wider
society or that helps with that but it
also really helps to protect them but
there's this particularly vulnerable
group of around about just under 1.5
million people the exact numbers are
kind of being sorted out at the moment
who we are very keen to have the
absolute minimum contact possible for
quite a long period of time and I think
what we've been very clear is that
there's a group of people who we are
able to identify which is the great
majority
who have been identified and written to
in the first wave and there's a second
wave of letters going out today from NHS
digital over this week which is we have
identified centrally from their medical
records this is necessary there are
additional people have been identified
either by specialist medical groups or
in some cases by GPS who know that
someone has got a group of conditions or
a particular condition that isn't on the
list but makes them particularly
vulnerable but equally so so people have
been added to the list as a result of
that equally there have been some people
who will have taken a decision in
discussion with their GP that they
simply do not wish to be part of this
the idea of being for many weeks
completely cut off at least physically
from society except for the absolute
basic necessities of course we hope
people will be linked to people by
social media and other areas that this
is not something they wish to do and
this particularly for example might
apply to people who are have had a
terminal diagnosis and during palliative
care and err on the last stages where
they would just make a rational life
decision that was not what they wish to
do so there will be people in terms of
around the around the big group who will
have been identified there will be some
people who go in to the shielding
program who are not initially identified
and always some people who initially
were identified who either because their
medical condition is different from how
it has been centrally recorded or
because of their own choices in
discussion with their doctor will choose
not to be part of that and that was
always something we expected to happen
did you have a follow-up Rob can I come
back to you mr. Roy I don't think he
really answered my question just to be
clear we know that the antibody test
will not be ready for the end of the
month can you say is your promise now
today that the government will carry out
100,000 daily antigen tests by the end
of the month well I'm not going to say
anything different from what the health
sector has already said what I hope
people understand is is that we are
striving every sinew to get both sets of
tests to the highest level we can that
involves tapping the domestic sources
and supplies but also using the foreign
office network and will
teaming up with differed in the
Department for international trade to
try and get as many international
supplies but of course lots of these
things are in very high demand but we
are doing everything we can on every
front to get all of the testing
capabilities we need and yes there have
the health Secretary's a hundred
thousand per day target still stands
thank you all very see the headlines as
they happen and watch BBC News live in
the app and get the full story with BBC
decoder UK forward slash news follow the
story for all the latest with BBC News